# Query

This is the most common use case for RTK Query. A query operation can be performed with any data fetching library of your choice, but the general recommendation is that you only use queries for requests that retrieve data. For anything that alters data on the server or will possibly invalidate the cache, you should use a Mutation.

By default, RTK Query ships with `fetchBaseQuery`, which is a lightweight `fetch` wrapper that automatically handles request headers and response parsing in a manner similar to common libraries like `axios`.

## Defining Query Endpoints

Query endpoints are defined by returning an object inside the `endpoints` section of `createApi`, and defining the fields using the `builder.query()` method.

Query endpoints should define either a `query` callback that constructs the URL (including any URL query params), or a `queryFn` callback that may do arbitrary async logic and return a result.

If the `query` callback needs additional data to generate the URL, it should be written to take a single argument. If you need to pass in multiple parameters, pass them formatted as a single "options object".

Query endpoints may also modify the response contents before the result is cached, define "tags" to identify cache invalidation, and provide cache entry lifecycle callbacks to run additional logic as cache entries are added and removed.

```jsx
import { createApi, fetchBaseQuery } from '@reduxjs/toolkit/query/react'

const api = createApi({
  baseQuery: fetchBaseQuery({
    baseUrl: '/',
  }),
  tagTypes: ['Post'],
  endpoints: (build) => ({
    // The query accepts a number and returns a Post
    getPost: build.query({
      // note: an optional `queryFn` may be used in place of `query`
      query: (id) => ({ url: `post/${id}` }),
      // Pick out data and prevent nested properties in a hook or selector
      transformResponse: (response, meta, arg) => response.data,
      // Pick out errors and prevent nested properties in a hook or selector
      transformErrorResponse: (response, meta, arg) => response.status,
      providesTags: (result, error, id) => [{ type: 'Post', id }],
      // The 2nd parameter is the destructured `QueryLifecycleApi`
      async onQueryStarted(
        arg,
        {
          dispatch,
          getState,
          extra,
          requestId,
          queryFulfilled,
          getCacheEntry,
          updateCachedData,
        },
      ) {},
      
      // The 2nd parameter is the destructured `QueryCacheLifecycleApi`
      async onCacheEntryAdded(
        arg,
        {
          dispatch,
          getState,
          extra,
          requestId,
          cacheEntryRemoved,
          cacheDataLoaded,
          getCacheEntry,
          updateCachedData,
        },
      ) {},
    }),
  }),
})
```

## Performing Queries with React Hooks

If you're using React Hooks, RTK Query does a few additional things for you. The primary benefit is that you get a render-optimized hook that allows you to have 'background fetching' as well as derived booleans for convenience.

Hooks are automatically generated based on the name of the `endpoint` in the service definition. An endpoint field with `getPost: builder.query()` will generate a hook named `useGetPostQuery`.

## Hook types

There are 5 query-related hooks:

1. `useQuery`
    - Composes `useQuerySubscription` and `useQueryState` and is the primary hook. Automatically triggers fetches of data from an endpoint, 'subscribes' the component to the cached data, and reads the request status and cached data from the Redux store.
2. `useQuerySubscription`
    - Returns a `refetch` function and accepts all hook options. Automatically triggers fetches of data from an endpoint, and 'subscribes' the component to the cached data.
3. `useQueryState`
    - Returns the query state and accepts `skip` and `selectFromResult`. Reads the request status and cached data from the Redux store.
4. `useLazyQuery`
    - Returns a tuple with a `trigger` function, the query result, and last promise info. Similar to `useQuery`, but with manual control over when the data fetching occurs. **Note: the `trigger` function takes a second argument of `preferCacheValue?: boolean` in the event you want to skip making a request if cached data already exists.**
5. `useLazyQuerySubscription`
    - Returns a tuple with a `trigger` function, and last promise info. Similar to `useQuerySubscription`, but with manual control over when the data fetching occurs. **Note: the `trigger` function takes a second argument of `preferCacheValue?: boolean` in the event you want to skip making a request if cached data already exists.**

In practice, the standard `useQuery`-based hooks such as `useGetPostQuery` will be the primary hooks used in your application, but the other hooks are available for specific use cases.

## Query Hook Options

The query hooks expect two parameters: `(queryArg?, queryOptions?)`.

The `queryArg` param will be passed through to the underlying `query` callback to generate the URL.

The `queryOptions` object accepts several additional parameters that can be used to control the behavior of the data fetching:

- skip - Allows a query to 'skip' running for that render. Defaults to `false`
- pollingInterval - Allows a query to automatically refetch on a provided interval, specified in milliseconds. Defaults to `0` *(off)*
- selectFromResult - Allows altering the returned value of the hook to obtain a subset of the result, render-optimized for the returned subset.
- refetchOnMountOrArgChange - Allows forcing the query to always refetch on mount (when `true` is provided). Allows forcing the query to refetch if enough time (in seconds) has passed since the last query for the same cache (when a `number` is provided). Defaults to `false`
- refetchOnFocus - Allows forcing the query to refetch when the browser window regains focus. Defaults to `false`
- refetchOnReconnect - Allows forcing the query to refetch when regaining a network connection. Defaults to `false`

## Frequently Used Query Hook Return Values

The query hook returns an object containing properties such as the latest `data` for the query request, as well as status booleans for the current request lifecycle state. Below are some of the most frequently used properties. Refer to `useQuery` for an extensive list of all returned properties.

- `data` - The latest returned result regardless of hook arg, if present.
- `currentData` - The latest returned result for the current hook arg, if present.
- `error` - The error result if present.
- `isUninitialized` - When true, indicates that the query has not started yet.
- `isLoading` - When true, indicates that the query is currently loading for the first time, and has no data yet. This will be `true` for the first request fired off, but *not* for subsequent requests.
- `isFetching` - When true, indicates that the query is currently fetching, but might have data from an earlier request. This will be `true` for both the first request fired off, as well as subsequent requests.
- `isSuccess` - When true, indicates that the query has data from a successful request.
- `isError` - When true, indicates that the query is in an `error` state.
- `refetch` - A function to force refetch the query

## Query Hook Usage Example

Here is an example of a `PostDetail` component:

```jsx
export const PostDetail = ({ id }: { id: string }) => {
  const {
    data: post,
    isFetching,
    isLoading,
  } = useGetPostQuery(id, {
    pollingInterval: 3000,
    refetchOnMountOrArgChange: true,
    skip: false,
  })

  if (isLoading) return <div>Loading...</div>
  if (!post) return <div>Missing post!</div>

  return (
    <div>
      {post.name} {isFetching ? '...refetching' : ''}
    </div>
  )
}
```

The way that this component is setup would have some nice traits:

1. It only shows 'Loading...' on the **initial load**
    - **Initial load** is defined as a query that is pending and does not have data in the cache
2. When the request is re-triggered by the polling interval, it will add '...refetching' to the post name
3. If a user closed this `PostDetail`, but then re-opened it within the allowed time, they would immediately be served a cached result and polling would resume with the previous behavior.

## Query Loading State

The auto-generated React hooks created by the React-specific version of `createApi` provide derived booleans that reflect the current state of a given query. Derived booleans are preferred for the generated React hooks as opposed to a `status` flag, as the derived booleans are able to provide a greater amount of detail which would not be possible with a single `status` flag, as multiple statuses may be true at a given time (such as `isFetching` and `isSuccess`).

For query endpoints, RTK Query maintains a semantic distinction between `isLoading` and `isFetching` in order to provide more flexibility with the derived information provided.

- `isLoading` refers to a query being in flight for the *first time* for the given hook. No data will be available at this time.
- `isFetching` refers to a query being in flight for the given endpoint + query param combination, but not necessarily for the first time. Data may be available from an earlier request done by this hook, maybe with the previous query param.

This distinction allows for greater control when handling UI behavior. For example, `isLoading` can be used to display a skeleton while loading for the first time, while `isFetching` can be used to grey out old data when changing from page 1 to page 2 or when data is invalidated and re-fetched.

```jsx
import { Skeleton } from './Skeleton'
import { useGetPostsQuery } from './api'

function App() {
  const { data = [], isLoading, isFetching, isError } = useGetPostsQuery()

  if (isError) return <div>An error has occurred!</div>

  if (isLoading) return <Skeleton />

  return (
    <div className={isFetching ? 'posts--disabled' : ''}>
      {data.map((post) => (
        <Post
          key={post.id}
          id={post.id}
          name={post.name}
          disabled={isFetching}
        />
      ))}
    </div>
  )
}
```

While `data` is expected to be used in the majority of situations, `currentData` is also provided, which allows for a further level of granularity. For example, if you wanted to show data in the UI as translucent to represent a re-fetching state, you can use `data` in combination with `isFetching` to achieve this. However, if you also wish to *only* show data corresponding to the current arg, you can instead use `currentData` to achieve this.

In the example below, if posts are being fetched for the first time, a loading skeleton will be shown. If posts for the current user have previously been fetched, and are re-fetching (e.g. as a result of a mutation), the UI will show the previous data, but will grey out the data. If the user changes, it will instead show the skeleton again as opposed to greying out data for the previous user.

```jsx
import { Skeleton } from './Skeleton'
import { useGetPostsByUserQuery } from './api'

function PostsList({ userName }: { userName: string }) {
  const { currentData, isFetching, isError } = useGetPostsByUserQuery(userName)

  if (isError) return <div>An error has occurred!</div>

  if (isFetching && !currentData) return <Skeleton />

  return (
    <div className={isFetching ? 'posts--disabled' : ''}>
      {currentData
        ? currentData.map((post) => (
            <Post
              key={post.id}
              id={post.id}
              name={post.name}
              disabled={isFetching}
            />
          ))
        : 'No data available'}
    </div>
  )
}
```

## Query Cache Keys

When you perform a query, RTK Query automatically serializes the request parameters and creates an internal `queryCacheKey` for the request. Any future request that produces the same `queryCacheKey` will be de-duped against the original, and will share updates if a `refetch` is triggered on the query from any subscribed component.

## Avoiding unnecessary requests

By default, if you add a component that makes the same query as an existing one, no request will be performed.

In some cases, you may want to skip this behavior and force a refetch - in that case, you can call `refetch` that is returned by the hook.

```jsx
const { status, data, error, refetch } = dispatch(
  pokemonApi.endpoints.getPokemon.initiate('bulbasaur'),
)
```