# Redux Connect

`CreatedAt- 01 Jan 2025 / RevisedAt-` 

The **connect()** function in React Redux connects the React components with the Redux store. It is a higher-order component provided by the React Redux library that allows you to access the state of Redux and then dispatch the action without worrying about how the Redux works.

```jsx
function connect(mapStateToProps?, mapDispatchToProps?, mergeProps?, options?)
```

The `mapStateToProps` and `mapDispatchToProps` deals with your Redux store’s `state` and `dispatch`, respectively. `state` and `dispatch` will be supplied to your `mapStateToProps` or `mapDispatchToProps` functions as the first argument.

The returns of `mapStateToProps` and `mapDispatchToProps` are referred to internally as `stateProps` and `dispatchProps`, respectively. They will be supplied to `mergeProps`, if defined, as the first and the second argument, where the third argument will be `ownProps`. The combined result, commonly called `mergedProps`, will then be supplied to your connected component.

## Connect **Parameters**

`connect` accepts four different parameters, all optional. By convention, they are called:

1. `mapStateToProps?: Function`
2. `mapDispatchToProps?: Function | Object`
3. `mergeProps?: Function`
4. `options?: Object`

## Map State To Props

If a `mapStateToProps` function is specified, the new wrapper component will subscribe to Redux store updates. This means that any time the store is updated, `mapStateToProps` will be called. The results of `mapStateToProps` must be a plain object, which will be merged into the wrapped component’s props. If you don't want to subscribe to store updates, pass `null` or `undefined` in place of `mapStateToProps`.

A `mapStateToProps` function takes a maximum of two parameters. The number of declared function parameters (a.k.a. arity) affects when it will be called. This also determines whether the function will receive its own Props.

1. `state: Object`
2. `ownProps?: Object`

### State

If your `mapStateToProps` function is declared as taking one parameter, it will be called whenever the store state changes, and given the store state as the only parameter.

```jsx
mapStateToProps(state) => ({count: state.value})
```

### Own Props

If your `mapStateToProps` function is declared as taking two parameters, it will be called whenever the store state changes *or* when the wrapper component receives new props (based on shallow equality comparisons). It will be given the store state as the first parameter, and the wrapper component's props as the second parameter.

The second parameter is normally referred to as `ownProps` by convention.

```jsx
mapStateToProps(state, ownProps) => ({count: ownProps ? state.value : 0})
```

```jsx
// ... CountComponent here

const mapStateToProps = (state) => {
  return {
    count: state.value
  }
}

export default connect(mapStateToProps)(CountComponent);
```

If a plain object is returned from `mapStateToProps`, the returned `stateProps` object is merged into the component’s props. You can access these props in the component as follows:

```jsx
function CountComponent({count}) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>{count}</h1>
    </div>
  )
}
```

However, if a function is returned, that function is used as `mapStateToProps` for each instance of the component. This can be useful for improving the rendering performance and for memoization.

## Map Dispatch To Props

Conventionally called `mapDispatchToProps`, this second parameter to `connect()` may either be an object, a function, or not supplied.

Your component will receive `dispatch` by default, i.e., when you do not supply a second parameter to `connect()`:

```jsx
// do not pass `mapDispatchToProps`
connect()(MyComponent)
connect(mapState)(MyComponent)
connect(mapState, null, mergeProps, options)(MyComponent)
```

If you define a `mapDispatchToProps` as a function, it will be called with a maximum of two parameters.

### Dispatch

If your `mapDispatchToProps` is declared as a function taking one parameter, it will be given the `dispatch` of your `store`.

```jsx
const mapDispatchToProps = (dispatch) => {
  return {
    // dispatching plain actions
    increment: () => dispatch({ type: 'INCREMENT' }),
    decrement: () => dispatch({ type: 'DECREMENT' })
  }
}
```

### Own Props

If your `mapDispatchToProps` function is declared as taking two parameters, it will be called with `dispatch` as the first parameter and the props passed to the wrapper component as the second parameter, and will be re-invoked whenever the connected component receives new props.

The second parameter is normally referred to as `ownProps` by convention.

```jsx
const mapDispatchToProps = (dispatch, ownProps) => {
  return {
    // dispatching plain actions
    increment: () => dispatch({ type: 'INCREMENT' }),
    decrement: () => dispatch({ type: 'DECREMENT' })
  }
}
```

Your `mapDispatchToProps` functions are expected to return an object. Each fields of the object should be a function, calling which is expected to dispatch an action to the store.

```jsx
function Counter({ count, increment, decrement }) {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>{count}</h1>
      <button onClick={increment}>Increment</button>
      <button onClick={decrement}>Decrement</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```